a. What Happens When You Enter “google.com” in a Browser

When you type google.com into your browser and press Enter, a series of steps occur behind the scenes to load the webpage.

1. DNS Resolution (Domain Name System)

The browser needs to find the IP address of google.com to connect to it.

Process:

The browser checks its cache for the IP.

If not found, it asks the local DNS resolver (usually your ISP).

The resolver queries the Root Nameserver → points to .com TLD server.

The .com server points to Google’s authoritative nameserver.

The nameserver returns the IP address (e.g., 142.250.190.78).

📍 Result: google.com → 142.250.190.78

2. Browser Establishes a TCP Connection

Once the IP is known, the browser uses the TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) to connect to the web server.

The connection is created using the 3-way handshake:

SYN: Browser sends a request to start communication.

SYN-ACK: Server acknowledges the request.

ACK: Browser confirms the connection.

3. HTTPS and TLS Handshake

Since Google uses HTTPS, a TLS (Transport Layer Security) handshake happens.

This ensures the connection is secure and encrypted.

Steps include:

Browser and server exchange security certificates.

Encryption keys are established for safe data transfer.

4. Sending the HTTP Request

After the secure connection is established, the browser sends an HTTP GET request for the webpage:

GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: google.com


The server then processes this request.

5. Server Response

Google’s server sends back an HTTP response with:

Status Code: 200 OK (if successful)

Content: HTML, CSS, JS files for the homepage.

6. Rendering the Webpage

The browser:

Parses the HTML.

Downloads CSS, images, and JavaScript.

Builds the DOM (Document Object Model).

Displays the final webpage to the user.

7. Browser Caching

The browser stores files locally to load faster next time.

Caches DNS data, images, and scripts.

✅ Summary of Steps

DNS lookup → find IP address

TCP connection → establish link

TLS handshake → encrypt data

HTTP request → ask for webpage

Server response → send files

Browser renders → display page

Cache → save for future use

b. How Search Engines Work

A search engine (like Google or Bing) helps users find information on the web using automated processes.

1. Crawling

Search engines use web crawlers (bots/spiders) to browse the web automatically.

They follow links from one page to another and collect data.

Example crawler: Googlebot

🕷️ Goal: Discover new or updated webpages.

2. Indexing

The collected data is processed and stored in a massive database called the index.

The index contains:

Page titles

Keywords

Links

Content summary

Metadata

📘 Goal: Understand what each page is about.

3. Ranking

When you search, the search engine checks the index and ranks results using algorithms.

Ranking factors include:

Relevance (how closely it matches your search)

Quality (original and useful content)

Page speed

Mobile-friendliness

Backlinks (links from other sites)

📈 Goal: Show the most useful and trustworthy results first.

4. Displaying Results

The Search Engine Results Page (SERP) shows:

Organic results (non-paid)

Sponsored ads

Snippets, images, videos, maps, etc.

| Step | Name     | Function                 |
| ---- | -------- | ------------------------ |
| 1    | Crawling | Discover web pages       |
| 2    | Indexing | Store and organize data  |
| 3    | Ranking  | Order pages by relevance |
| 4    | Results  | Display best matches     |
